80 new topic publishing code (#553)
ScilifelabDataCentre/RDM-guidelines: content/topics/sharing-code-workflows.md

**Workflows** 

Scientific workflows or pipelines are code that describe the structured sequences that organise and automate research tasks. They detail the flow of data between tasks, often managed by Workflow Management Systems (WMS), and encapsulate a higher level of complexity by integrating multiple software components, scripts, and tools. 

## Why share code & workflows?

In life science research, code and workflows are often as important as the data itself. From data processing scripts to full analysis pipelines — sharing your code is about <b>openness</b>, <b>improving</b> your science, gaining <b>recognition</b>, and allowing others to build on your work.
<br><br>
Openly sharing code and workflows not only fulfils key scientific and ethical principles, but also catalyses new discoveries and collaborations across the life sciences. It ensures that research methodologies are transparent, reproducible, and accessible to all, laying the groundwork for a more inclusive and innovative scientific community.

> * **Strengthen scientific integrity and utility** - Clear documentation and the ability to replicate analyses build trust in scientific results, and are essential for verifying and understanding research findings. Sharing workflows allows them to be applied to new datasets or challenges, maximising the utility and lifespan of research tools, and preventing the loss of valuable methodologies.

Reviewer: I think this makes the sentence a bit clearer – “reproduce” feels more natural than “replicate” and it also highlights that it’s not just about transparency of the analysis, but of the rest of the work too.
```suggestion
* **Strengthen scientific integrity and utility** - Clear documentation and the ability to reproduce the work of others build trust in scientific results, and are essential for verifying and understanding research findings. Sharing workflows allows them to be applied to new datasets or challenges, maximising the utility and lifespan of research tools, and preventing the loss of valuable methodologies.
```

## Why share code & workflows?
<div class="row">
  <div class="col-7">
    In life science research, code and workflows are often as important as the data itself. From data processing scripts to full analysis pipelines — sharing your code is about <b>openness</b>, <b>improving</b> your science, gaining <b>recognition</b>, and allowing others to build on your work.
    <br><br>
    Openly sharing code and workflows not only fulfills key scientific and ethical principles but also catalyzes new discoveries and collaborations across the life sciences. It ensures that research methodologies are transparent, reproducible, and accessible to all, laying the groundwork for a more inclusive and innovative scientific community.
  </div>
  <div class="col-5" style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="/img/illustrations/works-on-my-computer.JPG" alt="Works on my computer" class="img-fluid">
    <br><small>Robot: MetaManMachine by Nikola Vasiljevic (2021), CC BY-SA 4.0, doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4471098" target="_blank">10.5281/zenodo.4471098</a></small>
  </div>
</div>

### Strengthen scientific integrity and utility

> * **Transparency and Reproducibility** – Clear documentation and the ability to replicate analyses build trust in scientific results, and is essential for verifying and understanding research findings.

Reviewer 2: and are

* **Reusability and Preservation** – Sharing enables workflows to be applied to new datasets or challenges, maximising the utility and lifespan of research tools and preventing the loss of valuable methodologies.

### Enhance research efficiency and compliance

* **Operational Efficiency** – Modular, well-documented software facilitates smoother research processes, from rerunning experiments to adapting methodologies for new data. 

> * **Legal and Ethical Compliance** – Publishing software and data independently of each other as well as associated research articles simplifies compliance with licensing requirements. Adherence with open code mandates set by journals and funders enhances research credibility and broadens dissemination.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Legal and Ethical Compliance** – Publishing software and data independently of each other, and of associated research articles, simplifies compliance with licencing requirements. Adherence with open code mandates set by journals and funders both enhances research credibility, and broadens dissemination.
```

> * **Recognition** – Open code obtains scholarly recognition through citations, emphasising the importance of software as a research output.

Reviewer 3: not always just classical citations - can use things like RRID to gain acknowledgement

Reviewer 3: This is 'open code' in the next it's 'open software', maybe stick with 'code' for consistency, as you already defined what 'code' means earlier (so we know it includes software), unless of course something applies specifically to only software

### Foster collaboration and global innovation
* **Global Access and Education** – Sharing tools broadens their reach, enabling equitable access and serving as vital resources for training the next generation of scientists, particularly in resource-limited settings.

> * **Community Contributions and Cross-Field Innovation** – Open software encourages community input and interdisciplinary exchanges, leading to more robust, flexible solutions and sparking innovation across research domains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Community Contributions and Cross-Field Innovation** – Open code encourages community input and interdisciplinary exchanges, leading to more robust, flexible solutions, and sparking innovation across research domains.
```

<a class="link-teal" href="https://www.software.ac.uk/blog/why-should-you-care-about-reproducible-code-and-how-get-started" target="_blank"> <b>Learn more about practical benefits and how to get started <i class="bi bi-box-arrow-up-right"></i></b></a>

> <a class="link-teal" href="https://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:kb:publ-738" target="_blank"><b>Download and read the National Library of Sweden’s national guidelines <i class="bi bi-box-arrow-up-right"></i></b></a>

Reviewer 3: what are they guidelines on?

## How to share code & workflows?

> How you share code and workflows depends on your goals—whether you seek transparency, collaboration, or community contributions. Keep in mind that your objectives may evolve over time, and every step towards FAIR practices adds value.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
How you share code and workflows depends on your goals; whether you seek transparency, collaboration, or community contributions. Keep in mind that your objectives may evolve over time, and every step towards FAIR practices adds value.  
```

> <a class="link-teal" href="https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.29086775.v1" target="_blank"> <b>Consult the SciLifeLab Open Science Software Checklist for comprehensive guidance<i class="bi bi-box-arrow-up-right"></i></b></a>

Author: We will link to the md version on the main branch instead. (Note to self: also change to main in the resources)

### Where can code and workflows be shared?

> To ensure transparency, make a static copy of your code or workflow available for long-term access, independent of any research paper. This should be accompanied by a README file with a clear description, usage instructions, and a license. Collaborative version control platforms, such as GitHub, are ideal for both sharing and ongoing development. Use tags or releases to reference specific versions of your code.

Reviewer 4: Regarding the license. For workflows there will be a license for the workflow itself, and then also for the tools it uses.

> To ensure transparency, make a static copy of your code or workflow available for long-term access, independent of any research paper. This should be accompanied by a README file with a clear description, usage instructions, and a license. Collaborative version control platforms, such as GitHub, are ideal for both sharing and ongoing development. Use tags or releases to reference specific versions of your code.

Author: Yes we will clarify this.

> To ensure transparency, make a static copy of your code or workflow available for long-term access, independent of any research paper. This should be accompanied by a README file with a clear description, usage instructions, and license(s). Collaborative version control platforms, such as GitHub, are ideal for both sharing and ongoing development. Use tags or releases to reference specific versions of your code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To ensure transparency, make a static copy of your code or workflow available for long-term access, independent of any research paper. This should be accompanied by a README file with a clear description, usage instructions, and licence(s). Collaborative version control platforms, such as GitHub, are ideal for both sharing and ongoing development. Use tags or releases to reference specific versions of your code.
```

> To enhance FAIRness, consider obtaining a persistent identifier by publishing your code or workflow in a research output repository, such as [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/) or the [SciLifeLab Data Repository](https://figshare.scilifelab.se/). This can be achieved by linking your GitHub repository or uploading files directly.

Reviewer 3: you can get an identifier automatically for different releases by linking GitHub to Zenodo. If you want a general identifier, the RRID. If your code is going to be FAIR, then you could also consider https://fairsharing.org

> If your code or workflow is intended for reuse, distribute it through a package manager (e.g., BioConda or CRAN). For workflows, consider joining communities like [nf-core](https://nf-co.re/) or [Galaxy Europe](https://galaxyproject.org/eu/), and register your workflow on platforms such as [WorkflowHub](https://workflowhub.eu/). These steps help others build upon your work.

Author: During the contentathon we concluded that containers were out of scope for this page put we will try to include 1-2 sentences to convey the message "compute environment should be described too"

> If your code or workflow is intended for reuse, distribute it through a package manager (e.g., [BioConda](https://bioconda.github.io/) or [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/)). For workflows, consider joining communities like [nf-core](https://nf-co.re/) or [Galaxy Europe](https://galaxyproject.org/eu/), and register your workflow on platforms such as [WorkflowHub](https://workflowhub.eu/). These steps help others build upon your work.

Reviewer 3: mention nf-core?

For software, consider publishing in a dedicated software journal (e.g., [Journal of Open Source Software](https://joss.theoj.org/)) or as a software article in a life sciences journal (e.g., [PLOS Computational Biology](https://collections.plos.org/collection/software/) or [BMC Bioinformatics](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/submission-guidelines/preparing-your-manuscript/software-article)).

### Tips & Tricks

> - Start from a template or "cookie cutter" to streamline setup.

Reviewer 5: Fair point, I had no luck finding a good list to link to but these could be considered:

- https://cookiecutter-data-science.drivendata.org/
- https://github.com/MolSSI/cookiecutter-cms

```suggestion
- Start from a template or "cookie cutter" to streamline setup and follow best practices. 
```

> - Start from a template or "cookie cutter" to streamline setup.

Author: Since we don't have one specific cookie cutter to recommend to everyone we will add these (and others if suggested) as tools in the resources section at the bottom of the page.

> - Write readable code by using meaningful variable names, logical structure, and clear comments.

Reviewer 2: We could also mention using an IDE and code style linters to help structure the code and make it more readable. We could provide links for example to two carpentries lessons (python specific):

https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/python-intermediate-development/15-coding-conventions.html

https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/python-intermediate-development/16-verifying-code-style-linters.html

Author: We will add these resources as training materials. Also NBIS programming formalism course. 
Linters are now mentioned

> For software, consider publishing in a dedicated software journal (e.g., [Journal of Open Source Software](https://joss.theoj.org/)) or as a software article in a life sciences journal (e.g., [PLOS Computational Biology](https://collections.plos.org/collection/software/) or [BMC Bioinformatics](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/submission-guidelines/preparing-your-manuscript/software-article)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For software, consider publishing in a dedicated software journal (e.g. [Journal of Open Source Software](https://joss.theoj.org/)) or as a software article in a life sciences journal (e.g. [PLOS Computational Biology](https://collections.plos.org/collection/software/) or [BMC Bioinformatics](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/submission-guidelines/preparing-your-manuscript/software-article)).
```

> - Start from a template or "cookie cutter" to streamline setup and follow best practices. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Start from a template or "cookie cutter" to streamline setup, and follow best practices. 
```

- Expand your README beyond the basics—see our [README topic page](https://data-guidelines.scilifelab.se/topics/readme-files) for inspiration. 
- Ask a colleague to test access and if they can understand how to use the code.

> - Remember to cite your code in your research publications.

Reviewer 6: Perhaps https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/archiving-a-github-repository/referencing-and-citing-content ?

> 

Author: These are all good practices but a bit too much detail for this page. We think this belongs in the open science software checklist but will also add these to our contentathon document for consideration in the future.

> 

Author: @SuneJoubert maybe these are already included in the checklist but if not you might want to add them

> - Write readable code by using meaningful variable names, logical structure, and clear comments. Some languages offer packages/tools that lint and format code for consistency. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Write readable code by using meaningful variable names, a logical structure, and clear comments. Some coding languages offer packages/tools that lint and format code for consistency. 
```

Reviewer 3: linting can also be achieved by actions (e.g. markdown linting action on GitHub)

> - Expand your README beyond the basics—see our [README topic page](https://data-guidelines.scilifelab.se/topics/readme-files) for inspiration. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Expand your README file beyond the basics. See our [README topic page](https://data-guidelines.scilifelab.se/topics/readme-files) for inspiration. 
```

> - Ask a colleague to test access and if they can understand how to use the code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Ask a colleague to test whether they can access and understand how to use the code.
```

## Resources

> Please find below resources concerning the sharing of code and workflows in form of training, guidance and/or tools.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please find below resources concerning the sharing of code and workflows in form of training, guidance, and/or tools.
```
